>> Woodruff: THE DEVASTATION
FROM THE DEADLY LINE OF STORMS
THAT SWEPT THROUGH THE MIDWEST
BECAME CLEARER TODAY-- HOMES
WRECKED, CARS TOSSED AROUND LIKE
TOYS, ENTIRE NEIGHBORHOODS
LEVELED.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY:
ANOTHER IN OUR SERIES OF
PERSONAL STORIES ON THE
HEALTHCARE LAW'S IMPACT.
TONIGHT: TWO PARENTS AND THEIR
LONG SEARCH FOR COVERAGE, FOR
THEMSELVES AND FOR THEIR
CHILDREN.
>> TO HAVE SOMEONE SAY YES,
YOU QUALIFY FOR THIS AND
WHAT YOU ARE ABLE TO GET, WE
COULD ACTUALLY BREATHE NOW.
YOU KNOW, ACTUALLY SAY WE
GOT INSURANCE, YOU KNOW.
IT WAS AWESOME.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, SILICON
VALLEY TURNS ITS GAZE TO THE
STARS.
TECH STARTUPS ARE WORKING ON
COMMERCIAL SPACE FLIGHTS, MINING
THE MOON, AND MORE.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO BUILD THE
IPHONE OF SATELLITES.
THE BEAUTY OF THIS APPROACH
IS THAT FOR LESS THAN THE
COST OF A SINGLE IMAGING
SATELLITE IN TODAY'S WORLD
WEAN C LAUNCH A ENTIRE
CONSTELLATION OF SATELLITES.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THEY SEARCHED FOR
VICTIMS AND TALLIED THE DAMAGE
TODAY, AFTER A BARRAGE OF
TORNADOES HIT THE MIDWEST ON
SUNDAY.
AT LEAST EIGHT PEOPLE WERE
KILLED, AND SCORES MORE WERE
HURT.
THE MOST POWERFUL STORM CUT A
PATH ROUGHLY AN EIGHTH OF A MILE
WIDE, CLEAR ACROSS ONE ILLINOIS
TOWN OF 16,000 PEOPLE.
>> TERRIFIED TOWNSPEOPLE
WATCHED AND PRAYED AS THE
GIANT FUNNEL RIPPED THROUGH
WASHINGTON, ILLINOIS, SUNDAY.
WINDS OF ALMOST 200 MILES
PER HOUR TORE AT TREES AND
BLASTED HOMES TO BITS.
>> THIS IS WHAT MY HOUSE
LOOKS LIKE AFTER A TORNADO
CAME THROUGH.
>> IN A MATTER OF MINUTES IT
WAS ALL OVER.
THEN RESIDENTS SURVEYED THE
DAMAGE, UP TO 500 HOMES
DAMAGED OR DESTROYED.
AND CARS CRUSHED INTO
MANGLED METAL.
>> TODAY AN EMOTIONAL MAYOR
GARY MINERE VOWED HIS TOWN
WILL RECOVER.
>> THAT IS WHAT THIS
COMMUNITY IS ABOUT.
WE LOVE OUR NEIGHBORS AND
WE'RE GOING TO BOUNCE BACK
FROM THIS.
AND I WANT TO THANK THE
SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES THAT
HAVE REACHED OUT IN DROVES
OF PEOPLE.
IT LOOKED LIKE A PARKING LOT
LAST NIGHT SO MANY PEOPLE
CAME INTO OUR COMMUNITY TO
HELP US.
WE HAD TO FINALLY SHUT THE
COMMUNITY DOWN AND SAY NO
MORE.
WE CAN'T HAVE IF I MORE
HELP.
>> Reporter: DEADLY STORMS
FROM THE SAME WEATHER FRONT
RAGED ACROSS THE MIDWEST
THROUGHOUT THE DAY ON
SUNDAY.
PULLING TREES OUT OF THE
GROUND AND FLIPPING CARS.
>> IT'S HARD.
I COULDN'T EVEN WALK OUT
HERE LAST NIGHT.
I KEPT WANTING TO BE INSIDE.
YOU GET LIKE A LITTLE
DEPRESSION MODE.
SO I DON'T HAVE THAT DRIVE
JUST OF YET TO LET'S GO AND
REBUILD AGAIN.
>> ILLINOIS GOVERNOR PAT
QUINN ULTIMATELY DECLARED
DISASTERS IN SEVEN COUNTIES.
HE TOO VISITED THE TOWN OF
WASHINGTON TODAY.
>> IT'S VERY, VERY IMPORTANT
THAT AT THIS TIME WE FINISH
OUR SEARCH-AND-RESCUE
EFFORTS ALL ACROSS OUR STATE
TO MAKE SURE THERE IS NO ONE
IN HARM AWAY.
BUT UPON COMPLETION OF THAT,
OUR MISSION NOW IS TO
RECOVER.
AND WE WILL RECOVER.
WE WILL PREVAIL OVER-- THESE
TORNADOES.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO
ILLINOIS TWISTERS AND
DAMAGING WINDS HIT A DOZEN
STATES.
IN THIS IMAGE FROM THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE,
RED DOTS SYMBOLIZE MORE THAN
80 TORNADO REPORTS ACROSS
THE REGION.
THE BLUE DOTS STAND FOR HIGH
WINDS FROM THUNDERSTORMS.
THOSE STORMS KNOCKED DOWN
POWER LINES IN TOWN AFTER
TOWN,AT  800,000 HOMES AND
BUSINESSES WERE STILL IN THE
DARK THIS MORNING.
FORECASTERS HAVE SOUNDED AN
EARLY ALERT BUT IT WAS SO
HIGHLY UNUSUAL TO SEE THAT
MANY STORMS WITH THAT MUCH
POWER, THIS LATE IN THE
YEAR.
WITH WINTER QUICKLY
APPROACHING, THE FOCUS IS
NOW ON CLEANING UP AND
MAKING NEIGHBORHOODS LIVABLE,
AS THE MAYOR OF WASHINGTON
POINTED OUT.
>> THE FORTUNATE THING IS
THIS THING HIT IN NOVEMBER.
AND NOVEMBER IS NOT THE
CONSTRUCTION SEASON TO THAT
WE BUILD HOMES IN THIS PART
OF OUR STATE AND PARTF O OUR
COUNTRY.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE A LONGER
PROCESS THAN IF IT HAPPENED
IN MARCH.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW KNOW
POLICE ARE KEEPING PEOPLE
OUT OF THE WORST-HIT AREAS
UNTIL THEY ARE DECLARED
SAFE.
THE TRAGEDY LEFT MANY
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE INTENSITY
AND VOLUME OF THE TWISTERS, AS
WELL AS THE UNUSUAL TIMING.
FOR ANSWERS, WE TURN TO HOWARD
BLUESTEIN, A PROFESSOR OF
METEOROLOGY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMA.
YOU FOR JOINING US,
PROFESSOR.
WE JUST SAW THAT MAP IN
WHICH ALL OF THOSE REPORTED
TORNADOES THROUGHOUT THE
ENTIRE MIDWEST.
HOW UNUSUAL WAS IT TO SEE A
WAVE OF STORMS LIKE THIS?
>> WELL, IT'S VERY UNUSUAL
TO SEE A WAVE OF STORMS LIKE
THIS THIS TIME OF YEAR.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE
EXPECT MIGHT HAPPEN IN MARCH
OR APRIL.
BUT IT'S EXTREMELY UNUSUAL
TO HAVE SUCH A WIDE SPREAD
OUTBREAK IN THE MIDWEST IN
NOVEMBER.
>> Ifill: LET'S WALK THROUGH
SOME OF THE UNUSUAL FEATURES
HERE.
WHEN WAS THE TIME OF DAY
WHEN THESE TORNADOES STRUCK?
WE'RE KIND OF USED TO
HEARING ABOUT LATE THAT COME,
TOUCHDOWNS OF TORNADOES.
BUT NOT AN EARLY MORNING
ONE.
>> YES, THIS WAS EXTREMELY
UNUSUAL.
I BELIEVE THE STORMS BEGAN
AROUND 9:00 IN THE MORNING.
AND USUALLY WE NEED TO GET
THE SUN'S HEATING DURING THE
DAY TO GET THE STORMS GOING
AM BUT IN THIS CASE, A VERY,
VERY POWERFUL STORM SYSTEM
CAME THROUGH THAT LIFTED THE
AIR VERY, VERY EARLY.
AND WE DIDN'T NEED TO GET TO
BE VERY WARM FOR THE STORMS
TO BE TRIGGERED.
>> Ifill: HOW ABOUT THE TIME
OF YEAR.
WE HEARD THE MAYOR OF
WASHINGTON, ILLINOIS, SAY
IT'S NOT CONSTRUCTION SEE
SON, IT'S NOT THE TIME WHEN
THEY ARE USUALLY BUILDING
HOUSES.
IN FACT, WE'RE ON THE LIP OF
WINTER.
HOW UNUSUAL WAS IT FOR TO US
SEE TORE TAD-- TORNADOES
LIKE THIS TOUCHDOWN THIS
TIME OF YEAR?
>> I THINK THIS SETS AN
ILLINOIS RECORD FOR THE
NUMBER OF TORNADOES IN
NOVEMBER.
THIS TIME OF THE YEAR IN
MID-NOVEMBER, WE EXPECT TO
SEE SNOW STARTING TO FALL.
BUT INSTEAD, VERY, VERY WARM
AIR CAME UP FROM THE GULF OF
MEXICO.
THE MOISTURE CAME UP FROM
THE GULF OF MEXICO AND THIS
TIME OF YEAR, IT USUALLY
DOESN'T MAKE IT THAT FAR
NORTH.
>> Ifill: SO DO WE HAVE ANY
REASON OF UNDERSTANDING WHY
IT DID THIS TIME?
>> WELL, I THINK THIS MAY
HAVE BEEN JUST ONE UNUSUAL
EVENT.
A STORM SYSTEM CAME IN ON
FRIDAY, AN UPPER LEVEL STORM
SYSTEM, MOVED IN FROM CANADA
INTO THE PAS CIVIC NORTHWEST.
IT TRACKED ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AND JUST BEFORE IT
HIT ILLINOIS WHEN IT WAS
OVER IOWA, IT RAPIDLY
AMPLIFIED AND INTENSIFIED.
AND SO I THINK THAT WAS WHAT
WAS MAINLY RESPONSIBLE FOR
PRODUCING THIS PARTICULAR
OUTBREAK.
>> Ifill: I'VE SEEN REPORTS
OF EVERYTHING FROM A COUPLE WE W
80 REPORTED TORNADOES TOCHING
DOWN IN THAT REGION, ALL
THOSE DOZEN STATES.
DO WE HAVE A COUNT?
IS THERE ANY WAY TO KNOW
WHAT THE COUNT IS?
>> WE DON'T HAVE A GOOD
COUNT RIGHT NOW YET.
THERE MAY HAVE BEEN 80 OR
MORE REPORTS OF TORNADOES.
BUT MANY OF THOSE REPORTS
WERE FROM THE SAME TORNADO
AS IT MOVED ALONG A PART.
SO I EXPECT THAT THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
WILL PROBABLY GO OUT AND DO
DAMAGE SURVEYS AND AFTER THE
DAMAGE SURVEYS WE SHOULD
KNOW HOW MANY TORNADOES
THERE ACTUALLY WERE.
>> Ifill: IN TERMS OF
INTENSITY AND SPEED AND
SCOPE, HOW DOES THIS COMPARE
TO OTHER WEATHER EVENTS LIKE
THIS WE'VE SEEN, ESPECIALLY
TORNADOES IN THE MIDWEST?
>> WELL, THIS IS NOT ONE OF
THE MOST INTENSE OUTBREAKS
WE'VE EVER SEEN.
THERE WERE NO EF-5 TORNADOES
AS FAR AS I KNOW.
ALTHOUGH AFTER THE DAMAGE
SURVEY, IT'S POSSIBLE THAT
THEY MAY FIND SOME EVIDENCE
OF EF-5 DAMAGE.
BUT ONE THING THAT WAS
SPECIAL ABOUT THESE
PARTICULAR TORNADOES WAS
THAT THEY WERE MOVING VERY
QUICKLY FROM SOUTHWEST TO
NORTHEAST.
AND IF THEY ARE MOVING AT 50
MILES AN HOUR, THAT ADDS 50
MILES AN HOUR ON TO WHATEVER
SPEEDS ARE OF THE TORNADO
VORTEX.
SO THAT MAY HAVE ALSO
CONTRIBUTED TO THE INTENSITY
OF THE TORNADOES BEING
RELATIVELY HIGH.
>> Ifill: EVEN THOUGH 8
PEOPLE SADLY DIED, THERE WAS
A LOT OF DAMAGE.
WAS THERE A LOT OF ALERTS
THAT WENT OUT IN ADVANCE
THAT PREVENTED THIS FROM
HAVING BEEN WORSE?
>> THIS PARTICULAR EVENT WAS
EXTREMELY WELL FORECAST BY
THE NATIONAL WEATHER
SERVICE.
THE NIGHT BEFORE THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
ISSUED A PUBLIC STATEMENT
WARNING THE PUBLIC OF A
POSSIBLE SEVERE WEATHER
OUTBREAK.
AND EARLY IN THE MORNING,
VERY EARLY IN THE MORNING, A
HIGH-RISK OF SEVERE WEATHER
WAS ISSUED.
THIS IS THE HIGHEST LEVEL
THAT CAN BE FORECAST AND
ISSUED.
'S GOOD THAT
THEY HAD SOME WARNING, AT
LEAST.
PROFESSOR HOWARD BLUESTEIN
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMAING THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELL COME
>> Ifill: THERE'S WORD TODAY
THAT A NEW ONLINE CALCULATOR
APPEARS TO GREATLY OVERESTIMATE
CHOLESTEROL RISKS.
THE NEW TECH TOOL WAS UNVEILED
LAST WEEK BY THE AMERICAN HEART
ASSOCIATION AND THE AMERICAN
COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY.
BUT "THE NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTED TODAY THE CALCULATOR
CAN MISTAKENLY SUGGEST THAT
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE TAKE STATIN
DRUGS, WHEN THEY DON'T NEED
THEM.
THE MEDICAL GROUPS DEFDEDEN
THEIR OVERALL GUIDELINES AND
SAID THEY'LL LOOK INTO THE
CALCULATOR ISSUE.
WORKERS BEGAN A MAJOR STEP
TOWARD A FULL CLEANUPF A O
RUINED NUCLEAR POWER PLANT AT
FUKUSHIMA IN JAPAN.
TOKYO ELECTRIC POWER COMPANY
BEGAN REMOVING RADIOACTIVE FUEL
RODS FROM A REACTOR DAMAGED
DURING THE 2011 EARTHQUAKE AND
TSUNAMI.
TO PREVENT OVERHEATING, THE RODS
WERE PLACED IN A STEEL CASK
BEFORE BEING LIFTED FROM A
STORAGE POOL.
THE UTILITY'S PRESIDENT SAID THE
PROCESS IS OFF TO A GOOD
BEGINNING.
>> TODAY WE REACHED AN
IMPORTANT MILESTONE AT THE
FUCH SEEMA DAI-ICHI POWER
STATION.
I'M PLEASED TO REPORT TO YO
YOU -- HAS STARTED ON TIME.
AND PROGRESSED SAFELY
>> Ifill: THE OPERATION INVOLVES
MOVING MORE THAN 1,500 SETS OF
FUEL RODS TO A SAFER LOCATION.
IT'S EXPECTED TO LAST UNTIL THE
END OF 2014.
THE MAN ACQUITTED OF KILLING
FLORIDA TEENAGER TRAYVON MARTIN
IS IN TROUBLE WITH THE LAW
AGAIN.
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN WAS CHARGED
TODAY WITH ASSAULT AND BATTERY
IN APOPKA, FLORIDA.
HE'D BEEN ARRESTED AT A HOME HE
SHARED WITH HIS GIRLFRIEND.
LAST JULY, ZIMMERMAN WAS FOUND
NOT GUILTY IN THE MARTIN
SHOOTING.
SINCE THEN, HE'S BEEN STOPPED
FOR DRIVING VIOLATIONS, AND HAD
A DOMESTIC DISPUTE WITH HIS
ESTRANGED WIFE.
NASA'S LATEST MISSION TO MARS
LIFTED OFF FROM CAPE CANAVERAL
THIS AFTERNOON.
THE GOAL IS TO HELP EXPLAIN WHY
THE MARTIAN CLIMATE EVOLVED FROM
WARM AND WET IN ITS FIRST
BILLION YEARS, TO COLD AND DRY
TODAY.
AS THIS NASA ANIMATION SHOWS,
THE MAVEN EXPLORER IS TO ENTER
THE RED PLANET'S ORBIT IN
TEN MONTHS' TIME, CARRYING EIGHT
SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS TO
ANALYZE MAR'S UPPER ATMOSPHERE.
WALL STREET PASSED A COUPLE OF
MILESTONES TODAY, THEN
RETREATED.
THE S&P 500 CROSSED 1800 AT ONE
POINT, BEFORE FINISHING THE DAY
WITH A LOSS.
AND THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL
AVERAGE TRADED ABOVE
16,000 FOR THE FIRST TIME.
BUT BY DAY'S END, IT GAINED JUST
14 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 15976.
THE NASDAQ FELL 39 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3949.
IT WAS LED BY SELL-OFFS OF
FACEBOOK AND TWITTER STOCK.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
ONE FAMILY'S LONG SEARCH FOR
HEALTH INSURANCE.
RELIEF DIFFICULTIES CONTINUE IN
THE PHILIPPINES.
SILICON VALLEY SHOOTS FOR THE
MOON.
PART TWO OF OUR NEWSMAKER
INTERVIEW WITH THE NEW HEAD OF
THE A.T.F.
AND THE SCREENWRITER BEHIND THE
FILM "12 YEARS A SLAVE," JOHN
RIDLEY
>> Woodruff: THE WHITE HOUSE
SAID TODAY 20% OF AMERICANS WILL
STILL NOT BE ABLE TO BUY HEALTH
INSURANCE ON THE FEDERAL
EXCHANGE WEBSITE BY THE END OF
THE MONTH.
INSTEAD, THEY'LL NEED TO SIGN UP
BY PHONE OR IN PERSON, IN MANY
CASES BECAUSE OF THE COMPLEXITY
OF THEIR SITUATION.
BUT IN ADVANCE OF A
CONGRESSIONAL HEARING, A SENIOR
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL
WAS QUOTED AS SAYING
healthcare.gov IS IMPROVING, AND
SAID THEY ARE WORKING ON MAKING
IT EASIER FOR PEOPLE TO
UNDERSTAND WHETHER THEY ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR SUBSIDIES.
THAT'S BEEN A PROBLEM FOR MANY
UP TO NOW.
IT BRINGS US TO OUR SERIES ON
REACTIONS TO THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
TONIGHT, WE HEAR FROM A COUPLE
IN COLORADO WHO ARE FINALLY ABLE
TO INSURE THEIR FAMILY WITH THE
HELP OF A SUBSIDY, THROUGH A TAX
CREDIT.
>> MY NAME IS JOAQUIN
MONTEZ.
>> AND MY NAME IS ROSALEE
>> WE LIVE IN NEVADA,
MONTEZ.
COLORADO AND WE HAVE THREE
>> WE LIVE IN NEVADA,
KIDS.
COLORADO AND WE HAVE THREE
>> OUR OLDEST IS A DAUGHTER,
KIDS.
AND SHE'S IN COLLEGE.
>> OUR OLDEST IS A DAUGHTER,
AND WE HAVE A MIDDLE, HE IS
AND SHE'S IN COLLEGE.
A SON AND HE'S 13th AND
AND WE HAVE A MIDDLE, HE IS
ES 1/8 GRADER.
A SON AND HE'S 13th AND
OUR LITTLE ONE IS FOUR YEARS
ES 1/8 GRADER.
OLD.
OUR LITTLE ONE IS FOUR YEARS
WE MET IN HIGH SCHOOL IN THE
OLD.
9th GRADE I THINK WAS.
WE MET IN HIGH SCHOOL IN THE
AND WE'VE BEEN TOGETHER 24
9th GRADE I THINK WAS.
YEARS.
AND WE'VE BEEN TOGETHER 24
>> 25.
YEARS.
>> I WORK IN A WAREHOUSE AND
>> 25.
I DO NOT GET HEALTH
>> I WORK IN A WAREHOUSE AND
BENEFITS.
I DO NOT GET HEALTH
>> I WORK IN A WAREHOUSE AS
BENEFITS.
WELL DOING COMMERCIAL
>> I WORK IN A WAREHOUSE AS
SIGNAGE.
WELL DOING COMMERCIAL
AND THEY DON'T OFFER ANY
SIGNAGE.
BENEFITS.
AND THEY DON'T OFFER ANY
IT'S TOO SMALL OF A COMPANY.
BENEFITS.
>> WE HAVEN'T HAD INSURANCE
IT'S TOO SMALL OF A COMPANY.
BECAUSE IT'S PRETTY
>> WE HAVEN'T HAD INSURANCE
EXPENSIVE FOR US.
BECAUSE IT'S PRETTY
YOU KNOW, EVEN THOUGH WE
EXPENSIVE FOR US.
HAVE A TWO-INCOME HOUSEHOLD,
YOU KNOW, EVEN THOUGH WE
IT GETS REALLY EXPENSIVE.
HAVE A TWO-INCOME HOUSEHOLD,
>> ITS THAT'S THE WATER.
IT GETS REALLY EXPENSIVE.
>> WE LOOKEDINTO  HEALTH
>> ITS THAT'S THE WATER.
INSURANCE BEFORE AND IT
>> WE LOOKEDINTO  HEALTH
RANGES FROM ABOUT 450 TO
INSURANCE BEFORE AND IT
$600 DEPENDING ON WHO YOU GO
RANGES FROM ABOUT 450 TO
THROUGH AND WHAT KIND OF
$600 DEPENDING ON WHO YOU GO
DEDUCTIBLES YOU HAVE AND
THROUGH AND WHAT KIND OF
STUFF LIKE THAT.
DEDUCTIBLES YOU HAVE AND
SO IT'S KIND OF EXPENSIVE
STUFF LIKE THAT.
FOR US ON TOP OF A HOUSE
SO IT'S KIND OF EXPENSIVE
PAYMENT, A CAR PAYMENT, AS
FOR US ON TOP OF A HOUSE
WELL AS MAKING SURE OUR KIDS
PAYMENT, A CAR PAYMENT, AS
AND FED AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
WELL AS MAKING SURE OUR KIDS
SO NORMALLY WHAT WE DO WHEN
AND FED AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
OUR KID DOES GET REALLY,
SO NORMALLY WHAT WE DO WHEN
REALLY, REALLY SICK, WE TAKE
OUR KID DOES GET REALLY,
THEM TO URGENT CARE, YOU
REALLY, REALLY SICK, WE TAKE
KNOW, BECAUSE WE CAN'T
THEM TO URGENT CARE, YOU
AFFORD ANY HOSPITAL BILLS
KNOW, BECAUSE WE CAN'T
AND STUFF.
AFFORD ANY HOSPITAL BILLS
AND IT'S KIND OF A FLAT
AND STUFF.
RATEMENT YOU PAY AS YOU GO.
AND IT'S KIND OF A FLAT
>> BUT IT GETS PRETTY PRICEY.
RATEMENT YOU PAY AS YOU GO.
OUR SON PLAYS FOOTBALL AND
>> BUT IT GETS PRETTY PRICEY.
HAS BROKEN HIS COLLARBONE
OUR SON PLAYS FOOTBALL AND
TWICE, ONE RIGHT AFTER THE
HAS BROKEN HIS COLLARBONE
OTHER, SAME SPOT.
TWICE, ONE RIGHT AFTER THE
WE HAD TO GO TO URGENT CARE
OTHER, SAME SPOT.
BOTH TIMES.
WE HAD TO GO TO URGENT CARE
>> THERE WAS ANOTHER TIME
BOTH TIMES.
TOO WHERE MY OLDEST DAUGHTER
>> THERE WAS ANOTHER TIME
HAD GOT REAL SICK FROM
TOO WHERE MY OLDEST DAUGHTER
SOMETHING SHE HAD ATE.
HAD GOT REAL SICK FROM
AND YOU KNOW, THERE WAS
SOMETHING SHE HAD ATE.
REALLY NOTHING WE COULD DO
AND YOU KNOW, THERE WAS
TO HELP HER OUT.
REALLY NOTHING WE COULD DO
WE TRIED TO WAIT IT OUT AS
TO HELP HER OUT.
MUCH AS WE COULD BUT SHE WAS
WE TRIED TO WAIT IT OUT AS
REALLY IN PAIN.
MUCH AS WE COULD BUT SHE WAS
SO WE TOOK HER TO THE
REALLY IN PAIN.
HOSPITAL.
SO WE TOOK HER TO THE
AND IT WAS PRETTY EXPENSIVE.
HOSPITAL.
>> SHE GOT E COLI.
AND IT WAS PRETTY EXPENSIVE.
>> SO I THINK THAT BILL
>> SHE GOT E COLI.
ENDED UP BEING CLOSE TO
>> SO I THINK THAT BILL
$17,000.
ENDED UP BEING CLOSE TO
>> HOW WAS YOUR DAY TODAY.
$17,000.
>> I WAS ALWAYS WORRIED AND
>> HOW WAS YOUR DAY TODAY.
ANXIOUS.
>> I WAS ALWAYS WORRIED AND
I TRY TO DO THE BEST I CAN
ANXIOUS.
WHEN THEY ARE SICK HERE TO
I TRY TO DO THE BEST I CAN
REMEDY THEM AT HOME.
WHEN THEY ARE SICK HERE TO
BUT THERE ARE THINGS YOU
REMEDY THEM AT HOME.
CAN'T DO.
BUT THERE ARE THINGS YOU
IT'S SUCH A BIG LOAD TO
CAN'T DO.
CARRY BECAUSE YOU'RE JUST ON
IT'S SUCH A BIG LOAD TO
A DAILY BASIS YOU'RE
CARRY BECAUSE YOU'RE JUST ON
WONDERING IF YOUR KIDS ARE
A DAILY BASIS YOU'RE
HEALTHYMENT AND WHEN THEY'RE
WONDERING IF YOUR KIDS ARE
NOT YOU'RE JUST TRYING TO
HEALTHYMENT AND WHEN THEY'RE
FIGURE OUT DIFFERENT WAYS TO
NOT YOU'RE JUST TRYING TO
GET THEM HEALTHY WITHOUT THE
FIGURE OUT DIFFERENT WAYS TO
INSURANCE.
GET THEM HEALTHY WITHOUT THE
>> WE FIRST HEARD ABOUT THE
INSURANCE.
OBAMACARE THROUGH A
>> WE FIRST HEARD ABOUT THE
COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROGRAM.
OBAMACARE THROUGH A
ONE OF THE GUYS THAT I
COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROGRAM.
TALKED MENTIONED TO ME THAT
ONE OF THE GUYS THAT I
THERE WERE OTHER PEOPLE IN
TALKED MENTIONED TO ME THAT
THE PROGRAM THAT COULD HPEL
THERE WERE OTHER PEOPLE IN
US OUT WITH OBAMACARE.
THE PROGRAM THAT COULD HPEL
SO WE CALLED THE LADY THAT
US OUT WITH OBAMACARE.
WORKED THERE.
SO WE CALLED THE LADY THAT
AND SHE DIDN'T HESITATE.
WORKED THERE.
I THINK TWO DAYS LATER WE
AND SHE DIDN'T HESITATE.
ACTUALLY MET WITH HER.
I THINK TWO DAYS LATER WE
GOT INTO HER OFFICE.
ACTUALLY MET WITH HER.
SHE SAT US DOWN.
GOT INTO HER OFFICE.
WE FILLED OUT THE
SHE SAT US DOWN.
APPLICATIONS AND THAT'S HOW
WE FILLED OUT THE
WE WENT ABOUT APPLYING FOR
APPLICATIONS AND THAT'S HOW
IT.
WE WENT ABOUT APPLYING FOR
>> WE KIND OF GOT SPLIT UP
IT.
IN OUR INSURANCE.
>> WE KIND OF GOT SPLIT UP
THE KIDS ARE ON CHP AND A
IN OUR INSURANCE.
GOVERNMENT PROGRAM THAT
THE KIDS ARE ON CHP AND A
INSURANCES CHILDREN AND
GOVERNMENT PROGRAM THAT
THEY'RE SEPARATE FROM WHAT
INSURANCES CHILDREN AND
WE QUALIFIED FOR.
THEY'RE SEPARATE FROM WHAT
WE QUALIFIED FOR BASIC
WE QUALIFIED FOR.
INSURANCE.
WE QUALIFIED FOR BASIC
>> WITH OT BAMACARE THE MAIN
INSURANCE.
COST WILL BE $450 PER MONTH.
>> WITH OT BAMACARE THE MAIN
OBAMACARE, THE TAX CREDITS
COST WILL BE $450 PER MONTH.
WILL GIVE US $287 A MONTH TO
OBAMACARE, THE TAX CREDITS
APPLY TOWARDS THAT BILL SO
WILL GIVE US $287 A MONTH TO
OUR FINAL BILL WILL BE $155
APPLY TOWARDS THAT BILL SO
A MONTH.
OUR FINAL BILL WILL BE $155
NOW THAT THE TAX CEDE SIT
A MONTH.
HELPING US OUT, WE'RE ABLE
NOW THAT THE TAX CEDE SIT
TO AFFORD IT.
HELPING US OUT, WE'RE ABLE
>> DEAR LORD WE THANK YOU
TO AFFORD IT.
FOR BLESSING US WITH ANOTHER
>> DEAR LORD WE THANK YOU
DAY, FATHER.
FOR BLESSING US WITH ANOTHER
>> KNOWING THAT WE HAVE THAT,
DAY, FATHER.
AND THAT WE CAN QUALIFY FOR
>> KNOWING THAT WE HAVE THAT,
SOMETHING BECAUSE THERE HAVE
AND THAT WE CAN QUALIFY FOR
BEEN SO MANY TIMES WE'VE
SOMETHING BECAUSE THERE HAVE
BEEN TURNED DOWN TO BE
BEEN SO MANY TIMES WE'VE
QUALIFIED FOR ANYTHING, TO
BEEN TURNED DOWN TO BE
HAVE SOMEBODY ACTUALLY SAY
QUALIFIED FOR ANYTHING, TO
YES, YOU QUALIFY THIS AND
HAVE SOMEBODY ACTUALLY SAY
THIS IS WHAT YOU ARE ABLE TO
YES, YOU QUALIFY THIS AND
GET, WE COULD ACTUALLY
THIS IS WHAT YOU ARE ABLE TO
BREATHE NOW.
GET, WE COULD ACTUALLY
YOU KNOW, ACTUALLY SAY WE
BREATHE NOW.
GOT INSURANCE, YOU KNOW.
YOU KNOW, ACTUALLY SAY WE
SO IT WAS AWESOME.
GOT INSURANCE, YOU KNOW.
>> Woodruff: AS WE HAVE
SO IT WAS AWESOME.
THROUGHOUT, WE TRY TO FILL OUT
>> Woodruff: AS WE HAVE
THE BIGGER PICTURE.
THROUGHOUT, WE TRY TO FILL OUT
TONIGHT, JULIE ROVNER OF NPR IS
THE BIGGER PICTURE.
BACK TO HELP US OUT.
TONIGHT, JULIE ROVNER OF NPR IS
>> THANKS, JUDEY.
BACK TO HELP US OUT.
>> Woodruff: SO WE JUST SAW
>> THANKS, JUDEY.
THE STORY OF THE MONTEZ
>> Woodruff: SO WE JUST SAW
FAMILY IN COLORADO.
THE STORY OF THE MONTEZ
GENERALLY WHO IS ELIGIBLE TO
FAMILY IN COLORADO.
APPLY FOR AND GET A SUBSIDY
GENERALLY WHO IS ELIGIBLE TO
LIKE THE ONE THEY GOT?
APPLY FOR AND GET A SUBSIDY
>> IT'S PEOPLE WHO ARE IN
LIKE THE ONE THEY GOT?
BETWEEN 100% AND 400%6
>> IT'S PEOPLE WHO ARE IN
POVERTY.
BETWEEN 100% AND 400%6
PEOPLE DON'T REALIZE THERE
POVERTY.
IS ACTUALLY A FLOOR.
PEOPLE DON'T REALIZE THERE
IF YOU EARN UNDER 100%6
IS ACTUALLY A FLOOR.
POVERTY ARE YOU NOT ELIGIBLE
IF YOU EARN UNDER 100%6
TO PURCHASE ON THE EXCHANGE
POVERTY ARE YOU NOT ELIGIBLE
IT WAS ASSUMED THOSE PEOPLE
TO PURCHASE ON THE EXCHANGE
WOULD BE GETTING THE
IT WAS ASSUMED THOSE PEOPLE
EXPANDED MEDICAID, IN THE
WOULD BE GETTING THE
STATES THAT ARE DOING THAT
EXPANDED MEDICAID, IN THE
THEY WILL, IN THE OTHER HALF
STATES THAT ARE DOING THAT
OF THE STATES THEY COULD
THEY WILL, IN THE OTHER HALF
FALL BETWEEN THE CRACKS, BUT
OF THE STATES THEY COULD
IF YOU ARE UP TO 400% OF
FALL BETWEEN THE CRACKS, BUT
POVERTY, THAT IS ABOUT
IF YOU ARE UP TO 400% OF
$46,000 FOR AN INDIVIDUAL,
POVERTY, THAT IS ABOUT
UP TO ABOUT $94,000, SO WELL
$46,000 FOR AN INDIVIDUAL,
INTO THE MIDDLE CLASS FOR A
UP TO ABOUT $94,000, SO WELL
FAMILY OF FOUR, YOU WILL BE
INTO THE MIDDLE CLASS FOR A
ELIGIBLE FOR SOME SUBSIDY.
FAMILY OF FOUR, YOU WILL BE
OBVIOUSLY THE SUBSIDIES ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR SOME SUBSIDY.
LARGER THE LOWER YOUR INCOME
OBVIOUSLY THE SUBSIDIES ARE
IS AND SMALLER AS YOUR
LARGER THE LOWER YOUR INCOME
INCOME GETS HIGHER.
IS AND SMALLER AS YOUR
>> IF YOU ARE NOT CLEAR
INCOME GETS HIGHER.
ABOUT IT, YOU GO TO THE WEB
>> IF YOU ARE NOT CLEAR
SITE AND YOU START TO PUT IN
ABOUT IT, YOU GO TO THE WEB
INFORMATION, THAT'S WHEN YOU
SITE AND YOU START TO PUT IN
FIND OUT WHETHER YOU ARE
INFORMATION, THAT'S WHEN YOU
ELIGIBLE.
FIND OUT WHETHER YOU ARE
>> THAT'S HOW IT IS SUPPOSED
ELIGIBLE.
TO WORK.
>> THAT'S HOW IT IS SUPPOSED
AND THAT'S BEEN A LOT OF
TO WORK.
WHERE THE PROBLEM HAS BEEN
AND THAT'S BEEN A LOT OF
IS TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
WHERE THE PROBLEM HAS BEEN
EXACTLY HOW BIG YOUR SUBSIDY
IS TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
IS.
EXACTLY HOW BIG YOUR SUBSIDY
AND THERE'S THIS DATA HUB
IS.
THAT YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO PUT
AND THERE'S THIS DATA HUB
IN YOUR INCOME AND IT'S
THAT YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO PUT
SUPPOSED TO GO AND LOOK AT
IN YOUR INCOME AND IT'S
YOUR INCOME FROM THROUGH THE
SUPPOSED TO GO AND LOOK AT
IRS AND FIGURE OUT EXACTLY
YOUR INCOME FROM THROUGH THE
WHAT YOUR SUBSIDY IS GOING
IRS AND FIGURE OUT EXACTLY
TO BE AND COME BACK AND TELL
WHAT YOUR SUBSIDY IS GOING
YOU THAT.
TO BE AND COME BACK AND TELL
THEN IT'S SUPPOSED TO SHOW
YOU THAT.
YOU THESE PLANS WITH YOUR
THEN IT'S SUPPOSED TO SHOW
SUBSIDY APPLIED.
YOU THESE PLANS WITH YOUR
SO YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO SEE
SUBSIDY APPLIED.
HOW MUCH IT WILL COST YOU
SO YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO SEE
WITH THAT SUBSIDY INCLUDED.
HOW MUCH IT WILL COST YOU
>> Woodruff: SO WHEN IT
WITH THAT SUBSIDY INCLUDED.
WORKS CORRECTLY, AND I HEAR
>> Woodruff: SO WHEN IT
YOU SAYING IT HASN'T ALWAYS
WORKS CORRECTLY, AND I HEAR
BEEN WORKING CORRECTLY WHAT
YOU SAYING IT HASN'T ALWAYS
IS SUPPOSED TO HAPPEN?
BEEN WORKING CORRECTLY WHAT
YOU GO TO THE SITE OR YOU'RE
IS SUPPOSED TO HAPPEN?
ON THE PHONE AND WHAT
YOU GO TO THE SITE OR YOU'RE
HAPPENS.
ON THE PHONE AND WHAT
>> YOU GO TO THE SITE OR
HAPPENS.
YOU'RE ON THE PHONE.
>> YOU GO TO THE SITE OR
YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO GET
YOU'RE ON THE PHONE.
QUALIFIED, BASICALLY, FIND
YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO GET
OUT WHAT KIND OF SUBSIDY YOU
QUALIFIED, BASICALLY, FIND
ARE ELIGIBLE FOR.
OUT WHAT KIND OF SUBSIDY YOU
AND THEN YOU GO AND CHOOSE A
ARE ELIGIBLE FOR.
PLAN AND BASICALLY THAT
AND THEN YOU GO AND CHOOSE A
DISCOUNT, IT BECOMES A
PLAN AND BASICALLY THAT
DISCOUNT.
DISCOUNT, IT BECOMES A
AND SO YOU PAY AS WE JUST
DISCOUNT.
SAW IN THE PIECE, THE FAMILY
AND SO YOU PAY AS WE JUST
IS ONLY GOING TO PAY THE
SAW IN THE PIECE, THE FAMILY
SUBSIDIZED PRICE.
IS ONLY GOING TO PAY THE
IT'S NOT LIKE YOU HAVE TO
SUBSIDIZED PRICE.
ASK FOR THE TAX CREDIT AT
IT'S NOT LIKE YOU HAVE TO
TAX TIME.
ASK FOR THE TAX CREDIT AT
THAT TAX CREDIT GET AS PLIED
TAX TIME.
ON A MONTH-TO-MONTH BASIS.
THAT TAX CREDIT GET AS PLIED
THEN AT TAX TIME YOU
ON A MONTH-TO-MONTH BASIS.
RECONCILE F YOU HAVE
THEN AT TAX TIME YOU
UNDERPAID, YOU PAY A LITTLE
RECONCILE F YOU HAVE
MORE.
UNDERPAID, YOU PAY A LITTLE
IF YOU HAVE OVERPAID YOU GET
MORE.
A LITTLE BIT OF PUN BACK.
IF YOU HAVE OVERPAID YOU GET
>> THAT WAS MY QUESTION.
A LITTLE BIT OF PUN BACK.
THIS WAS IN THE FORM OF IT'S
>> THAT WAS MY QUESTION.
NOT JUST THAT YOU PAY A
THIS WAS IN THE FORM OF IT'S
LOWER PREMIUM, IT'S THAT
NOT JUST THAT YOU PAY A
THIS LITERALLY COMES OFF
LOWER PREMIUM, IT'S THAT
YOUR INCOME TAX.
THIS LITERALLY COMES OFF
>> THAT'S RIGHT, IT'S A TAX
YOUR INCOME TAX.
CREDIT BUT IT IS WHAT WE
>> THAT'S RIGHT, IT'S A TAX
CALL AN ADVANCEABLE,
CREDIT BUT IT IS WHAT WE
REFUNDABLE TAX CREDIT SO IT
CALL AN ADVANCEABLE,
GETS APPLIED TO YOUR MONTHLY
REFUNDABLE TAX CREDIT SO IT
PREMIUM.
GETS APPLIED TO YOUR MONTHLY
BUT THEN WHEN YOU FILE YOUR
PREMIUM.
TAXES, YOU BASICALLY HAVE TO
BUT THEN WHEN YOU FILE YOUR
MAKE SURE THAT YOU GOT THE
TAXES, YOU BASICALLY HAVE TO
RIGHT AMOUNT.
MAKE SURE THAT YOU GOT THE
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN IT'S
RIGHT AMOUNT.
NOT THIS YEAR, 2013, IT WILL
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN IT'S
START TO TAKE EFFECT IN 2014
NOT THIS YEAR, 2013, IT WILL
WHEN THEY WOULD START TO PAY
START TO TAKE EFFECT IN 2014
THE PREMIUM.
WHEN THEY WOULD START TO PAY
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE PREMIUM.
AND WOULD YOU BASICALLY, SO
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU WILL FILE IT IN APRIL OF
AND WOULD YOU BASICALLY, SO
2015 WHEN DOW YOUR 2014
YOU WILL FILE IT IN APRIL OF
TAXES.
2015 WHEN DOW YOUR 2014
>> SO AS PEOPLE HAVE TRIED
TAXES.
THIS, WHAT KINDS OF THINGS
>> SO AS PEOPLE HAVE TRIED
HAVE THEY RUN INTO AS
THIS, WHAT KINDS OF THINGS
THEY'VE TRIED TO APPLY FOR
HAVE THEY RUN INTO AS
THIS.
THEY'VE TRIED TO APPLY FOR
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE HAD
THIS.
TROUBLE BASICALLY GETTING,
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE HAD
YOU KNOW, THIS ESTIMATE OF
TROUBLE BASICALLY GETTING,
WHAT THEIR SUBSIDY WILL BE.
YOU KNOW, THIS ESTIMATE OF
THAT WAS THE BIGGEST
WHAT THEIR SUBSIDY WILL BE.
DIFFICULT FOR A LOT OF
THAT WAS THE BIGGEST
PEOPLE WAS FINDING OUT WHAT
DIFFICULT FOR A LOT OF
THAT SUBSIDY IS IT'S ALSO
PEOPLE WAS FINDING OUT WHAT
THE BIGGEST DIFFICULTY IN
THAT SUBSIDY IS IT'S ALSO
PEOPLE OUTSIDE TRYING TO
THE BIGGEST DIFFICULTY IN
SIGN UP.
PEOPLE OUTSIDE TRYING TO
A LOT OF OUTSIDE GROUPS, THE
SIGN UP.
INSURANCE COMPANIES, SOME
A LOT OF OUTSIDE GROUPS, THE
OUTSIDE PRIVATE EXCHANGES
INSURANCE COMPANIES, SOME
LIKE E HEALTH INSURANCE HAVE
OUTSIDE PRIVATE EXCHANGES
WANTED TO SIGN UP BUT THEY
LIKE E HEALTH INSURANCE HAVE
CALL THE SUBSIDY ELIGIBLE
WANTED TO SIGN UP BUT THEY
PEOPLE.
CALL THE SUBSIDY ELIGIBLE
THERE ARE A LOT OF THEM.
PEOPLE.
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO
THERE ARE A LOT OF THEM.
BECAUSE THE FEDERAL
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO
GOVERNMENT HASN'T BEEN ABLE
BECAUSE THE FEDERAL
TO FIND A WAY TO TAKE THESE
GOVERNMENT HASN'T BEEN ABLE
PEOPLE, FIND OUT WHAT
TO FIND A WAY TO TAKE THESE
THEY-- DETERMINE THEIR
PEOPLE, FIND OUT WHAT
SUBSIDY AND LET THEM THEN GO
THEY-- DETERMINE THEIR
BACK TO THESE OUTSIDE PLACES
SUBSIDY AND LET THEM THEN GO
AND SIGN UP FOR THESE HEALTH
BACK TO THESE OUTSIDE PLACES
INSURANCE PLANS.
AND SIGN UP FOR THESE HEALTH
SO THEY HAVE BEEN BASICALLY
INSURANCE PLANS.
STUCK IN THE FEDERAL WEB
SO THEY HAVE BEEN BASICALLY
SITE THAT DOESN'T WORK THAT
STUCK IN THE FEDERAL WEB
WELL WANSD REMIND US WHY DID
SITE THAT DOESN'T WORK THAT
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
WELL WANSD REMIND US WHY DID
FEEL THE NEED TO DO THESE
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
SUBSIDIES IN THE FIRST
FEEL THE NEED TO DO THESE
PLACE?
SUBSIDIES IN THE FIRST
>> WELL, BASICALLY, THE
PLACE?
BASIC PART OF THIS WAS THE
>> WELL, BASICALLY, THE
INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE
BASIC PART OF THIS WAS THE
SYSTEM DIDN'T WORK.
INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE
IT KEPT A LOT OF PEOPLE WITH
SYSTEM DIDN'T WORK.
PREEXISTING HEALTH
IT KEPT A LOT OF PEOPLE WITH
CONDITIONS OUT SO THE FIRST
PREEXISTING HEALTH
THING WAS TO LET EVERYBODY
CONDITIONS OUT SO THE FIRST
WHO WANTED INSURANCE TO GET
THING WAS TO LET EVERYBODY
IN.
WHO WANTED INSURANCE TO GET
OF COURSE IF YOU HAVE SICK
IN.
PEOPLE IN THIS POOL, NOW YOU
OF COURSE IF YOU HAVE SICK
WANT TO HAVE A LOT MORE
PEOPLE IN THIS POOL, NOW YOU
HEALTHY PEOPLE IN THE POOL.
WANT TO HAVE A LOT MORE
IN ORDER TO GET HEALTHY
HEALTHY PEOPLE IN THE POOL.
PEOPLE IN THE POOL, YOU
IN ORDER TO GET HEALTHY
BASICALLY HAD TO REQUIRE A
PEOPLE IN THE POOL, YOU
LOT OF PEOPLE IN THE POOL.
BASICALLY HAD TO REQUIRE A
IF YOU ARE GOING TO REQUIRE
LOT OF PEOPLE IN THE POOL.
PEOPLE IN THERE, WHAT WERE
IF YOU ARE GOING TO REQUIRE
YOU GOING TO DO ABOUT PEOPLE
PEOPLE IN THERE, WHAT WERE
WHO COULDN'T AFFORD IT WELL,
YOU GOING TO DO ABOUT PEOPLE
YOU WERE GOING TO HAVE TO
WHO COULDN'T AFFORD IT WELL,
GIVE THEM HELP.
YOU WERE GOING TO HAVE TO
THAT IS WHAT THE SUBSIDIES
GIVE THEM HELP.
ARE FOR.
THAT IS WHAT THE SUBSIDIES
THERE TO GET PEOPLE IN WHO
ARE FOR.
OTHERWISE COULDN'T AFFORD
THERE TO GET PEOPLE IN WHO
IT.
OTHERWISE COULDN'T AFFORD
>> Woodruff: AND DO WE KNOW
IT.
JUST QUICKLY, JULIE, WHAT
>> Woodruff: AND DO WE KNOW
PERCENTAGE OR HOW MANY
JUST QUICKLY, JULIE, WHAT
PEOPLE THEY BELIEVE ARE
PERCENTAGE OR HOW MANY
ELIGIBLE FOR THE SUBSIDIES?
PEOPLE THEY BELIEVE ARE
>> WELL, THE ESTIMATES VARY
ELIGIBLE FOR THE SUBSIDIES?
BUT THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET
>> WELL, THE ESTIMATES VARY
OFFICE AND OTHERS HAVE
BUT THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET
ESTIMATED THAT SOMEWHERE
OFFICE AND OTHERS HAVE
BETWEEN 18 AND 20 MILLION
ESTIMATED THAT SOMEWHERE
PEOPLE TOTAL, THIS IS OVER
BETWEEN 18 AND 20 MILLION
THE NEXT SEVERAL YEARS WILL
PEOPLE TOTAL, THIS IS OVER
BE ELIGIBLE FOR SOME SORT OF
THE NEXT SEVERAL YEARS WILL
FINANCIAL HELP INSIDE THE
BE ELIGIBLE FOR SOME SORT OF
EXCHANGES.
FINANCIAL HELP INSIDE THE
>> Woodruff: AND JUST
EXCHANGES.
FINALLY, BROADEN IT OUT, TO
>> Woodruff: AND JUST
THE OVERALL PROBLEMS, THE
FINALLY, BROADEN IT OUT, TO
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
THE OVERALL PROBLEMS, THE
HAVING.
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
THEY'VE BEEN GIVING D IT'S
HAVING.
GOING.
THEY'VE BEEN GIVING D IT'S
WHAT ARE THEY SAYING RIGHT
GOING.
NOW?
WHAT ARE THEY SAYING RIGHT
>> THEY KEEP SAYING IT'S
NOW?
GETTING BETTER.
>> THEY KEEP SAYING IT'S
THAT THE ERROR RATES ARE
GETTING BETTER.
GOING DOWN, PEOPLE ARE
THAT THE ERROR RATES ARE
GETTING ON FASTER.
GOING DOWN, PEOPLE ARE
THAT THEY'RE HAVING AN
GETTING ON FASTER.
EASIER TIME.
THAT THEY'RE HAVING AN
FOR INSTANCE, DETERMINING
EASIER TIME.
WHAT KIND OF SUBSIDY THEY'RE
FOR INSTANCE, DETERMINING
ELIGIBLE FOR.
WHAT KIND OF SUBSIDY THEY'RE
THEY'RE STILL WORKING WHAT
ELIGIBLE FOR.
THEY SAY ON THE BACK END OF
THEY'RE STILL WORKING WHAT
THE EXCHANGE WHICH IS
THEY SAY ON THE BACK END OF
GETTING PEOPLE ACTUALLY
THE EXCHANGE WHICH IS
ENROLLED IN PLANTS AND
GETTING PEOPLE ACTUALLY
GIVING OUT INFORMATION TO
ENROLLED IN PLANTS AND
THE INSURANCE PLAN.
GIVING OUT INFORMATION TO
THEY STILL SAY THEY'RE
THE INSURANCE PLAN.
AIMING TO HAVE THIS ALL
THEY STILL SAY THEY'RE
WORKING WELL AT THE END OF
AIMING TO HAVE THIS ALL
THE MONTH.
WORKING WELL AT THE END OF
BUT THEY DO KEEP REDEFINE
THE MONTH.
WRAING WORKING WELL AT THE
BUT THEY DO KEEP REDEFINE
END OF THE MONTH ACTUALLY
WRAING WORKING WELL AT THE
MEANS.
END OF THE MONTH ACTUALLY
THERE IS GOING TO BE A BIG
MEANS.
CRUNCH BECAUSE THERE ARE A
THERE IS GOING TO BE A BIG
LOT OF PEOPLE WHO WILL WANT
CRUNCH BECAUSE THERE ARE A
TO SIGN UP, AS THEY'VE BEEN
LOT OF PEOPLE WHO WILL WANT
WAITING FOR THE END OF THE
TO SIGN UP, AS THEY'VE BEEN
MONTH, BY DECEMBER 15TH, THE
WAITING FOR THE END OF THE
DATE YOU NEED TO BE SIGNED
MONTH, BY DECEMBER 15TH, THE
UP IN ORDER TO HAVE COVERAGE
DATE YOU NEED TO BE SIGNED
START JANUARY 1st.
UP IN ORDER TO HAVE COVERAGE
>> Woodruff: STARTING
START JANUARY 1st.
JANUARY 1.
>> Woodruff: STARTING
AND THAT IS JUST DAYS AWAY.
JANUARY 1.
>> CERTAINLY WILL BE BY THE
AND THAT IS JUST DAYS AWAY.
END OF THE MONTH.
>> CERTAINLY WILL BE BY THE
>> Woodruff: JULIE ROVNER OF
END OF THE MONTH.
NPR, THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: JULIE ROVNER OF
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Ifill: THERE WERE SOME SLOW
SIGNS OF RECOVERY IN THE TYPHOON
RAVAGED PHILIPPINES TODAY, AS
SOME MARKETS AND GAS STATIONS
REOPENED.
BUT U.N. OFFICIALS WARNED SOME
ISLANDS STILL HAVEN'T EVEN BEEN
REACHED.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM ANGUS
WALKER OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
>> THEY'RE LIVING WITH THE
DEAD.
THEY FOUND SANCTUARY IN A
CEMETERY.
SLEEPING ON TOP OF TOMB.
THESE CRYPTS ARE NOW HOMES
FOR NINE FAMILIES, TESS TATE
TELLS ME SHE USED TO LIVE IN
SCOTLAND, HER BRITISH
HUSBAND DIED 11 YEARS AGO.
SHE RETURNED TO THE
PHILIPPINES.
NOW SHE'S LOST EVERYTHING.
SHE SEES THE BODIES
RECOVERED FROM THE TYPHOON
BEING BROUGHT IN FOR BURIAL.
>> NOTHING WE CAN DO.
>> Reporter: IN TWO OF THE
FRESH GRAVES, CHRISTIAN AGE
7 AND JIMHILI PP, FOUR
THE BOYS HAD BEEN TOLD
THEY'D BE SAFER IN THIS CAR
BEFORE THE TYPHOON HIT.
IN ALL, EIGHT CHILDREN AND
TWO ADULTS SQUEEZED INSIDE.
ONLY ONE CHILD SURVIVED.
THEIR NINE-YEAR-OLD BROTHER.
THEIR FATHER TELL ITS ME
BELIEVES IT WAS GOD'S WILL
THAT HE LOST TWO OF HIS
THREE SONS.
A NEW LIFE, A WEEK OLD, HER
FAMILY LIVING HAND-TO-MOUTH
IN THE RUINS OF THEIR HOUSE
THEY NOW SHARE WITH HOMELESS
NEIGHBORS.
AMONG THEM, IMELDA, A MOTHER
OF SEVEN, HER HUSBAND WAS
KILLED.
>> REALLY DIFFICULT.
I MISS HIM VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: IN A CITY OF
DEATH, SIGNS OF LIFE RETURN
EVERY DAY.
SURVIVAL GOES ON O SEARCHING
FOR THINGS TO SELL.
MARKET ALLSTS GETTING STOCK,
REPAIRS AND RECOVERY NOW
CLEARLY UNDER WAY.
FOR DECADES WHEN AMERICANS
HAVE TALKED ABOUT EXPLORING
SPACE, THE GOVERNMENT AGENCY
NASA HAS BEEN FRONT AND
CENTER IN EVERY
CONVERSATION.
NASA, IN FACT, LAUNCHED ITS
LATEST MISSION TO MARS JUST
TODAY.
BUT THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS
STEPPING UP TO THE PLATE TOO,
INCREASINGLY IN CALIFORNIA'S
PROSPEROUS SILICON VALLEY.
KQED IN SAN FRANCISCO
NARRATES OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: 100 MILES NORTH
OF LOS ANGELES IN THE DUSTY
DESERT TOWN OF MOJAVE THE
WORLD'S FIRST COMMERCIAL
ROCKETHIP  SIS GEARING UP TO
LAUNCH AT TRO NAUGHTS TO THE
EDGE OF SPACE.
NO, THIS ISN'T A MOVIE, IT'S
REAL.
>> FOR 50 YEARS SPACE HAS
BEEN THE DOMAIN OF
PROFESSIONALS, RIGHT?
NASA ASTRONAUTS, RUSSIAN
ASTRONAUT, CHINESE ASTRONAUTS.
AND SO WHAT WE WANT TO DO IS
TO MAKE SPACE AVAILABLE AND
OPEN TO OTHER PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: BUT TO
EXPERIENCE THE THRILL OF A
FEW MINUTES OF
WEIGHTLESSNESS YOU'LL HAVE
TOAY P VIRGIN GALACTIC
$250,000 FOR A TWO AND A
HALF HOUR RIDE 60 OR SO
MILES ABOVE EARTH.
SURE, IT'S A LUXURY BUT
VIRGIN GALACTIC C.E.O.
GEORGE WHITESIDE THINKS THAT
PRICE WILL FALL EVENTUALLY.
>> LONG TERM, YOU KNOW, I
THINK THE PRICE CAN COME
DOWN.
ZURND AN SUV PRICE POINT,
YOU KNOW, WHERE YOU GET DOWN
TO THAT LEVEL.
IT'S STILL EXPENSIVE BUT I
THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WOULD
BE WILLING TO DO THIS, SORT
OF ONCE IN THEIR LIVES.
>> SINCE BILLIONAIRE TYCOON
RICHARD BRANSON FOUNDED
VIRGIN GALACTIC IN 2005 MORE
THAN 600 PEOPLE HAVE PLACED
DEPOSITS FOR THE FIRST
COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC
FLIGHTS.
THEY'RE SCHEDULED TO LIFT
OFF IN 2014.
TODAY DOZENS OF COMPANIES
ARE LAUNCHING NEW COMMERCIAL
SPACE VENTURES RANGING FROM
SPACE TOURISM TO MINING THE
MOON, FUELED BY THE
RISK-TAKING START-UP CULTURE
OF SILICON VALLEY.
BOB RICHARDS IS THE C.E.O.
OF MOON EXPRESS, A START-UP
IN MOUNTAIN VIEW.
HE AND HIS TEAM OF YOUNG
ENGINEERS ARE PLANNING AN
UNMANNED MISSION TO THE MOON
AT A COST OF 50 TO $100
MILLI.ON
>> SO IN GETTING TO THE MOON
LIKE ANY BUSINESS, IT'S
REALLY ABOUT BALANCING RISK
AND COST.
THIS IS A SUPERCOMPUTER IN
MY POCKET.
A BILLION TIMES MORE
POWERFUL THAN WHAT NASA
DESIGNED TO LAND THE FIRST
LANDERS ON THE MOON.
WE CAN USE THAT TECHNOLOGY
TODAY.
AND WE CAN USE TECHNOLOGY
LARGELY FOR THE COMMERCIAL
SECTOR.
>> Reporter: SURE A
PRIVATELY FUNDED MISSION TO
THE MOON SOUNDS RISKY, BUT
RICHARD THINKS IT'S A GOLD
MINE OF A BUSINESS
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Reporter: MOON EXPRESS IS
A HUNDREDDAR RESOURCES
COMPANY THAT MEANS WE WILL
EVENTUALLY BE MINING THE
MOON.
ASTEROIDS HAVE BEEN
BOMBARDING BOTH THE EARTH
AND MOON FOR BILLIONS OF
YEARS AND EVERY ASTEROID
CONTAINS BILLIONS OR MAYBE
TRILLIONSES OF DOLLARS WORTH
OF VALUABLE RESOURCES.
METALS, GOLD, SILVER.
>> Reporter: BUT BEFORE MOON
EXPRESS CAN MINE THE MOON,
IT HAS TO GET THERE.
WHICH IT'S TRYING TO DO WITH
A LUNAR LANDING BEING TESTED
AND DEVELOPED INSIDE A
HANGAR AT NASA AIMS RESEARCH
CENTER.
>> LET ME SHOW YOU THE TEST
FROM THIS MORNING.
THIS IS KIND OF LIKE DRIVERS
ED FOR THE SPACECRAFT.
WE'RE ACHITENG IT OVER AND
OVER HOW TO LAND SAFELY.
>> THE LANDER IS SCHEDULED
TO LAUNCH IN 2015 WITH LATER
COMMISSIONS TO PROSPECT AND
EVENTUALLY MINE THE MOON.
BUT CAN A COMPANY EVEN
LEGALLY DO THAT?
THE LAW ISN'T ENTIRELY CLEAR,
ACCORDING TO AVIATION AND
SPACE FLIGHT ATTORNEY
DOUGLAS GRIFFITH.
>> THE OUTER SPACE TRAINING
OF 1967 IS ADDRESSED TO
NATIONS.
IT IS AS THAT NATIONS CANNOT
OWN THE MOON IT DOESN'T SAY
ANYTHING ABOUT WHETHER
PRIVATE COMPANIES CAN SETTLE
ON THE MOON OR EXTRACT THE
MOON'S RESOURCES BECAUSE
PEOPLE JUST WEREN'T THINKING
ABOUT THAT BACK THEN.
>> ONE MINUTE 35 SECONDS.
>> Reporter: THE FOR-PROFIT
SPACE VENTURES OF TODAY ARE
A FAR CRY FROM THE BIG
GOVERNMENT LEAD EFFORTS THAT
THRUST A NATION TO